the Presidential Debates round to George
Bush Bill Clinton Ross Perot tonight
questioned by the people
[Music]
from Richmond Virginia NBC News decision
92 the presidential debates here is Tom
Brokaw good evening from the University
of Richmond where tonight the candidates
and the voters mix it up in a
freewheeling format that's never been
tried before this evening will be part
debate part game show part talk show and
all-important with the election just two
weeks from next Tuesday the candidates
will be coming out of the stage
momentarily they'll be sitting in some
tall chairs but they will not be
confined to them they can go out into
the audience and go one-on-one with the
people who'll be questioning Ross Perot
Bill Clinton and President Bush now
coming in they can leave their church as
I say for questions and interrupt each
other and be buddy the moderator tonight
is Carole Simpson of ABC News
[Applause]
good evening and welcome to the second
of three presidential debates between
the major candidates for president of
the United States the candidates are the
Republican nominee President George Bush
the independent Ross Perot and Governor
Bill Clinton the Democratic nominee
my name is Carol Simpson and I will be
the moderator for tonight's 90-minute
debate which is coming to you from the
campus of the University of Richmond in
Richmond Virginia now tonight's program
is unlike any other presidential debate
in history we're making history now and
it's pretty exciting an independent
polling firm has selected an audience of
209 uncommitted voters from this area
the candidates will be asked questions
by these voters on a topic of their
choosing anything they want to ask about
my job is moderator is to you know take
care of the questioning ask questions
myself if I think there needs to be
continuity and balance and sometimes I
might ask the candidates to respond to
what another candidate may have said now
the format has been agreed to by
representatives of both the Republican
and Democratic campaigns and there is no
subject matter that is restricted
anything goes we can ask anything after
the debate the candidates will have an
opportunity to make a closing statement
so President Bush I think you said it
earlier let's get it on let's go and I
think the first question is over here
yes I'd like to direct my question to
mr. Perot what will you do as president
to open foreign markets to fair
competition from American business and
to stop unfair competition here at home
from foreign countries so that we can
bring jobs back to the United States
that's right at the top of my agenda
which
millions of jobs overseas and we have a
strange situation because we have a
process in Washington where after you've
served for a while you can become a
foreign lobbyist make thirty thousand
dollars a month then take a leave work
on presidential campaigns make sure you
got good contacts and then go back out
if you just want to get out of brass
tacks first thing you ought to do is get
all these folks they've got these
one-way trade agreements that we've
negotiated over the years you say fellas
we'll take the same deal we gave you and
they'll gridlock right at that point
because for example we've got
international competitors who simply
could not unload their cars off the
ships if they had to comply you see if
there was a two-way street just couldn't
do it we have got to stop sending jobs
overseas
to those of you in the audience who are
businesspeople pretty simple if you're
paying twelve thirteen dollars fourteen
dollars now at the factory workers and
you can move your factory south to
border pay a dollar an hour for labor
hire young twenty five that's assume
you've been in business for a long time
you've got a matter work force pay a
dollar an hour for your labor have no
health care that's the most expensive
single element making the car have no
environmental controls no pollution
controls and no retirement and you don't
care about anything but making money
there will be a giant sucking sound
going south so we if the people send me
to Washington the first thing I'll do is
study that 2,000 page agreement and make
sure it's a two-way street I one last
point here I've called I decided I was
dumb and didn't understand it so I
called a who's who the folks have been
around it and I said why won't everybody
go south I say well be disruptive I said
for how long I finally got them up for
12 to 15 years and I said well how does
it stop being disruptive and that is
when their jobs come up from a dollar
now to $6 an hour and hours go down to
$6 an hour then it's leveled again but
in the meantime you've wrecked the
country with these kinds of deals we've
got a cutter date Thank You mr. Perot I
see that the president has stood up so
he must have something to say about this
Oh Carol the thing that saved us in the
global economic slowdown it's been our
exports and what I'm trying to do is
increase our exports and if indeed all
the jobs were going to move south
because they're lower wages they're
lower wages now and they haven't done
that and so I have just negotiated with
the president of Mexico the North
American Free Trade Agreement and the
Prime Minister of Canada I might add and
I won't have more of these free trade
agreements because export jobs are
increasing far faster than any jobs that
may have moved overseas that's that's a
scare tactic because it's not that many
but anyone that's here we want to have
more jobs here and the way to do that is
to increase our exports some believe in
protection I don't I believe in free and
fair trade and that's the thing that
saved us and so I will keep on as
president trying to get a successful
conclusion to the gap around the big
Uruguay Round of trade which will really
open up markets for our X for our
agriculture particularly I want to
continue to work after we get this NAFTA
agreement ratified this coming year I
want to I want to get one with Eastern
Europe I want to get one with Chile and
free and fair trade is the answer not
protection and as I say we've had tough
economic times and it's exports that
have saved us exports that have built
governor Clinton I'd like to answer the
question because I've actually been a
governor for 12 years so I've known a
lot of people who've lost their jobs
because of jobs moving overseas and I
know a lot of people whose plants have
been strengthened by increasing exports
the trick is to expand our export base
and to expand trade on terms that are
fair to us it is true that our exports
to Mexico for example have gone up and
our trade deficits going down it's also
true that just today a record-high trade
deficit was announced with Japan so what
is the answer let me just mention three
things very quickly number one make sure
that other countries are as open to our
markets as our markets are to them and
if they're not have net
on the books that don't take forever in
a day to implement number two change the
tax code there are more deductions in
the tax folks for shutting plants down
and moving overseas than there are for
modernizing plant and equipment here our
competitors don't do that emphasize and
subsidize modernizing plant and
equipment here not moving plants
overseas
number three stopped the federal
government's program that now gives
low-interest loans and job training
funds to companies that will actually
shut down and move to other countries
but we won't do the same thing for
plants that stay here
so more trade but on fair terms and
favor investment in America thank you I
think we have a question over here in
the real world that is outside of
Washington DC compensation and
achievement are based on goals defined
and achieved the deficit is my my
question is about the deficit would you
define in specific dollar goals how much
you would reduce the deficit in each of
the four years of a Clinton
administration and then enter into a
legally binding contract with the
American people that if you did not
achieve those goals that you would not
seek a second term answer yes or no and
then comment on your your answer please
no and here's why and I'll tell you
exactly one because the deficit now has
been building up for 12 years I'll tell
you exactly what I think can be done I
think we can bring it down by 50 percent
in four years and grow the economy now I
could get rid of it in four years in
theory on the books now but to do it
you'd have to raise taxes too much and
cut benefits too much to people who need
them and it would even make the economy
worse mr. Perot will tell you for
example that that the expert he hired to
analyze his plan says that it will bring
the deficit down in five years but it
will make unemployment bad for four more
years
so my view is sir you have to increase
investment grow the economy and reduce
the deficit by controlling health care
costs prudent reductions in defense cuts
and domestic programs and asking the
wealthiest Americans and foreign
corporations to pay their fair share of
taxes and invest
and growing this economy I asked
everybody to look at my economic ideas
nine Nobel Prize winners and over five
hundred economists and hundreds of
business people including a lot of
Republicans said this is the way you got
to go if you don't grow the economy you
can't get it done but I can't foresee
all the things that will happen and I
don't think a president should be judged
solely on the deficit let me also say
we're having an election today you'll
have a shot at me in four years you can
vote me right out if you think I've done
a lousy job and I would welcome you to
do that mr. president well I got a I'm a
little confused here because I don't see
how you can grow the deficit down by
raising people's taxes you see I don't
think the American people are taxed too
little I think they're taxed too much I
went for one tax increase and want to
make a mistake I admit it so that wasn't
the right thing to do
Governor Clinton's program wants to tax
more and spend more 150 billion dollars
in new taxes spend another to 220 I
don't believe that's the way to do it
here's some things that will help give
us a balanced budget amendment he always
talks about Arkansas having a balanced
budget they do but he has a balanced
budget amendment have to do it I'd like
the government to have that and I think
it would discipline not only the
Congress which needs it but also the
executive branch I'd like to have what
43 governors have the line-item veto so
if the Congress can't cut and we've got
a reckless spending Congress let the
president have a shot at it by wiping
out things that are pork barrel or
something of that nature
I'd like I proposed another one some
sophisticates think it may be a little
gimmicky I think it's good it's a check
off it says to you as a taxpayer I'd say
you're gonna pay a tax of a thousand
bucks or something you can check 10% of
that if you want to in one box and that
10% $100 or if you paying 10,000
whatever it is thousand dollars check it
off and make the government make it
lower the deficit by that amount and if
the Congress won't do it if they can't
get together and negotiate how to do
that then you'd have a sequester across
the board
you'd exempt Social Security I don't
want to tax or touch Social Security I'm
the president that said hey don't mess
with Social Security and we haven't
so I believe we need to control the
growth of mandatory spending back to
this gentleman's question that's the
main growing thing in the account in the
in the in the budget the the whole the
program that the president two-thirds of
the budget I as president never get to
look at never get to touch we've got to
control that growth to inflation and
population increase but not raise taxes
on the American people now I just don't
believe that would stimulate any kind of
growth at all how about you mr. Perot
well we're four trillion dollars and dad
we're going into debt an additional 1
billion dollars little more than a
billion dollars every working day of the
year now the thing I love about I'm just
a businessman I was down in Texas taking
care of business tending to my family
this situation got so bad that I decided
I've got to get into it American people
asked me to get into it but I just find
it fascinating that while we sit here
tonight we were going to debt an
additional 50 billion fifty million
dollars in an hour and a half now it's
not Republicans fault of course it's not
the Democrats fault and what I'm looking
for is who did it now they're the two
folks involved so makes you put them
together they did it now the facts are
we have to fix it we're leaving I'm here
tonight for these young people up there
in the balcony from this college when I
was a young man when I got out of the
Navy I had multiple job offers young
people with high grades can't get a job
people the the 18 to 24 year old high
school graduates 10 years ago we're
making more than they are now in other
words we were down to 18 percent of them
we're making that to the 18 to 24
year-olds we're making less than 12,000
now that's up to 40% and what's happened
in the meantime the dollars gone through
the floor now whose fault is that not
the Democrats not Republicans somewhere
out there there's an Extra Terrestrial
it's doing this to us I guess and
everybody says they take responsibility
somebody somewhere has to take
responsibility for this put it to you
bloody American people if you want me to
be your president we're going to face up
problems we'll deal with the problems
will solve our problems will pay down
our debt will pass on the American dream
to our children and I will not leave our
children a situation that they have to
when I was a boy it took two generations
to double the standard of living today
it will take 12 generations I got older
will not see the American dream because
this debt that somebody somewhere
dropped on us you're all wonderful
speakers and I know you have lots more
to add but I've talked to this audience
and they have lots of questions on other
topics can we move to another topic
please we have one up here I think yes
I'd like to address all the candidates
of this question the amount of time the
candidates have spent in this campaign
thrashing their opponents character and
the per and their programs is
depressingly large why can't your
discussions and proposals reflect the
genuine complexity and the difficulty of
the issues to try to build a consensus
around the best aspects of all proposals
who wants to take that one mr. Perot you
have an answer for everything don't you
go right ahead sir no I don't have an
answer for everything as you all know
I've been buying 30 minute segments to
talk about issues and tomorrow night on
NBC from 10:30 to 11:00 Eastern we're
going to talk about how you pay the debt
down so we're going to come right down
to that way see will be on again
Saturday night 8:00 to 9:00 o'clock on
ABC so I couldn't agree with you more
doesn't agree with you more and I have
said again and again and again let's get
off mud-wrestling let's get off
personalities and let's talk about jobs
health care climb the things that
concern the American people I'm spending
my money not PAC money not foreign money
my money to take this message to the
people Thank You mr. Perot so that seems
directed he would say it's you gentlemen
that have been doing that mr. Clinton
Governor Clinton how do President Bush
how would you like to respond well first
place I believe that character is a part
of being president I think you have to
look at it I think that has to be a part
of candidate for president or being
president in terms of programs I've
submitted what four different budgets to
the United States Congress in great
detail or so heavy they give you a you
know back and broken back and everything
in there says what I am for
now I've come out with a new agenda for
America's renewal a plan that I believe
really will help stimulate the growth
this economy my record on world affairs
is pretty well known because I've been
president for four years so I feel I've
been talking issues I you know nobody
likes that likes who who shot John but I
think the first negative campaign
running this in this election was by
Governor Clinton and I'm not going to
sit there and be a punching bag I'm
gonna stand up and say hey listen here's
my side of it but character is an
important part of the equation the other
night Governor Clinton raised my I don't
if you saw the debate the other night
they suffered through that well he
raised the question of my father it was
a good line well rehearsed and well
delivered but he raised the question of
my father and said well your father
Prescott Bush was against McCarthy you
should be ashamed to yourself
McCarthyism I'm I remember something my
dad told me I was 18 year old going to
Penn Station to go on into the Navy and
he said right your mother looks that
faithful he did he said serve your
country
my father was an honored duty and
country man and he said tell the truth
and I've tried to do that in public life
all through it and that has says
something about character my argument
with Governor Clinton you can call it
mud wrestling but I think it's I think
it's fair to put it in focus is I am
deeply troubled by someone who
demonstrates and organizes demonstration
in a foreign land when his country's at
war probably a lot of here kids here
disagree with me but that's what I feel
that's what I feel passionately about
I'm thinking of Ross Perot's running
mate sitting in the jail how would he
feel about it but maybe that's
generational I don't know but the big
argument I have with the Governor on
this is this taking different positions
on different issues trying to be one
thing to one person here that's opposing
the NAFTA green
and then for it what we call waffling
and I do think that you can't turn the
White House into the Waffle House you've
got to say what you're for and you got
it and I have precedent I'm getting time
cues I get wound up to the field let me
say first of all to you that I believe
so strongly in the question you asked
that I suggested this format tonight I
started doing these formats a year ago
in New Hampshire and I found that we had
huge clouds because all I did was let
people ask questions and I try to give
very specific answers I also had a
program starting last year I've been
disturbed by the tone and the tenor of
this campaign thank goodness the
network's have a fact check so I don't
have to just go blue in the face anymore
mr. Bush say once again tonight I was
going to have a hundred fifty billion
dollar tax increase when mr. Quayle said
that all the network said that's not
true he's got over 100 billion dollars
of tax cuts and incentives so I'm not
going to take up your time tonight but
let me just say this we'll have a debate
in four days and we can talk about this
character thing again
The Washington Post ran a long editorial
today saying they couldn't believe mr.
Bush was making character an issue and
they said he was the greatest quote
political comedian for changing his
positions of all time now I don't want
to get my thing didn't poets don't
listen let's talk you don't have to
believe that here's my point I'm not
interested in his character I want to
change the character of the presidency
and I'm interested in what we can trust
him to do and what you can trust me to
do and what you can trust mr. Perot to
do for the next four years so I think
you're right and I hope the rest of the
night belongs to you
may I I talked to this audience before
you gentlemen came and I asked them
about how they felt about the tenor of
the campaign would you like to let them
know what you thought about that when I
said are you pleased with how the
campaign's been going
who wants to say why you don't like the
way the campaign is going
we have a gentleman back here and
forgive the notes here but I'm shy on
camera the focus of my work is a
domestic mediator is meeting the needs
of the children that I work with by way
of their parents and not the wants of
their parents and I ask the three of you
how can we as symbolically the children
of the future president expect the two
of you the three of you to meet our
needs the needs and housing and and and
and crime and you name it as opposed to
the wants of your political spin doctors
and and your political parties so your
question is can we focus on the issues
and not the personalities and the mud I
think there is a there is a need if we
could take a poll here with the folks
from Gallup perhaps I think there is a
real need here to focus at this point on
the needs how do you respond how do you
gentlemen respond to I agree with him
let's do it let's talk about programs
for children yeah could we cross our
hearts and sounds silly here because we
make a commitment you know we're not
under oath at this point but could you
make a commitment to the to the citizens
of the United States to meet our needs
and we have many and and not yours again
I you know I repeat that that it's a
real need I think that we all have it
depends how you define it I mean I think
in general let's talk about these let's
talk about these issues let's talk about
the programs but in the presidency a lot
it goes into it caring is goes into it
that's not particularly specific
strength goes into it that's not
specific standing up against aggression
that's not specific in terms of a
program this is what a president has to
do so I in principle though I'll take
your point and think we ought to discuss
child care or whatever else it is and
you two go ahead
well I was also at his hand up no hairs
no ifs ands and buts I'll take the
pledge because I know the American
people want to talk about issues and not
tabloid journalism so I'll take the
pledge and we'll stay
the issues now just for the record I
don't have any spin doctors I don't have
any speech writers probably shows I make
those charts you see on television is
naturally now but you don't have to
wonder if it's me talking take what you
see is what you get if you don't like it
you got two other choices right oh wait
a minute I want to say just one thing
now Ross in fairness the idea is i
express her mind I've worked on these
things for 12 years and I'm the only
person up here who hasn't been part of
Washington in any way for the last 20
years so I don't want the implication to
be that somehow everything we say just
cooked up and put in our head by
somebody else I worked 12 years very
hard as a governor on the real problems
of real people I'm just as sick as you
are by having to wake up and figure out
how to defend myself every day I got it
I never thought I'd ever be involved in
anything like this now finished yes you
make the very briefly yes very bad I
don't have any foreign money in my
campaign I don't have any foreign
lobbyists on leave in my campaign I
don't have any PAC money in my campaign
I got five and a half million
hard-working people who put me on the
ballot and I belong to them okay and
they want are interested in what you're
interested in I take the pledge I've
already taken the pledge on cutting the
deficit in half I never got to say that
there's a great young group leader leave
college students young people who don't
want us to spend their money I took the
pledge we'd cut it out thank you we have
a question here yes I would like to get
a response from all three gentlemen and
the question is what are your plans to
improve the physical infrastructure of
this nation which includes the water
system the sewer system our
transportation systems as etc thank you
the cities whose gonna fix the cities
and how we go ahead and take a shot at
it please
I I'm not sure that and I could
understand if you haven't seen this cuz
there's been a lot of hue and cry we
passed this year the most farthest
looking transportation bill in the
history of this country since Eisenhower
started the interstate highways 100 and
50 billion dollars from proving the
infrastructure that happened when I was
president and so I'm very proud of the
way that came about and I think it's a
very very good beginning
like mr. Perot I am concerned about the
deficits and 150 billion is a lot of
money but it's awful hard to say we're
going to go out and spend more money
when we're trying to get the deficit
down but I would cite that is a major
accomplishment we hear all the negatives
when you're president you expect this
everybody running against the incumbent
they can do better
everyone knows that but here's something
that we can take great pride in because
it really does get to what you're
talking about
our home initiative our home ownership
initiative hope that passed the Congress
is a good start for having people own
their own homes instead of living in
these deadly tenements our enterprise
zones that we hear a lot of lip service
about in Congress would bring jobs into
the inner city there's a good program
and I need the help of everybody across
this country to get it passed
substantial way by the Congress when we
went out to south central in Los Angeles
some of you may remember the riots there
I went out there I went to a boys club
and every one of the boys club leaders
the ministers all of them are saying
pass Enterprise Zones we go back to
Washington and very difficult to get it
through the Congress but there's gonna
be a new Congress no one likes gridlock
there's gonna be a new Congress because
the old one I don't want to get this man
mad at me but there was a post office
scandal in a bank scandal you have a lot
of new members of Congress and then you
can sit down and say help me do what we
should for the city's help me pass these
programs mr. president are too
threatening to veto the the bill the
urban aid bill that included enterprise
zones sure but the problem is you get so
many things included in a great big bill
that you have to look at the overall
good that's the problem with our system
if you had a line-item veto you could
knock out the pork you can knock out the
tax increases and you could do what the
people want and that is create
enterprise zone governor Clinton you're
chomping at the bit that bill
pays for these urban Enterprise Zones by
asking the wealthiest Americans to pay a
little more and that's why he wants to
veto it just like he'd be told an
earlier bill this year this is not mud
sling this is facts slinging a bill
earlier this year this is facts that
that would have given investment tax
credits and other incentives to reinvest
in our cities in our country but it asks
the wealthiest Americans to pay a little
more mr. Perot wants to do the same
thing I agree with him I mean we agree
with that let me tell you specifically
what my plan does my plan would dedicate
twenty billion dollars a year in each of
the next four years for investments and
new transportation communications
environmental cleanups and new
technologies for the 21st century and we
would target it especially in areas that
have been either depressed or which have
lost a lot of defense-related jobs there
are 200,000 people in California for
example who've lost their
defense-related jobs they ought to be
engaged in making high-speed rail they
ought to be engaged in breaking ground
and other technologies doing waste
recycling clean water technology and
things of that kind we can create
millions of jobs in these new
technologies more than we're going to
lose in defense if we target it but
we're investing a much smaller
percentage of our income and the things
you just asked about than all of our
major competitors and our wealth growth
is going down as a result of its making
the country poor which is why I answered
the gentlemen the way I did before we
have to both bring down the deficit and
get our economy going through these
kinds of investments in order to get the
kind of wealth and jobs and incomes we
need in America mr. Perot what about
your plans for the cities you want to
tackle the economy and the deficit first
first you got to have money to pay pay
for these things so you've got to create
jobs there all kinds of ways to create
jobs the inner city now I'm not a
politician but I think I could go to
Washington in a week and get everybody
holding hands and get this bill signed
because I talked to Democratic leaders
and they wanted I've talked to
Republican leaders and they want it but
since they are bred from childhood to
fight with one another rather than get
results you know I would be glad to drop
out and spend a little time and see if
we couldn't build some bridges yeah
results is what counts the president
can't order Congress around come
can't order the president round that's
not bad for a guy that's never been
there right but you have to work
together now I have talked to the
chairman of the committee's that want
this they're Democrats the president
wants it but we can't get it because we
sit here in gridlock because it's a
campaign here we didn't fund a lot of
other things this year like the savings
and loan mess that's another story we're
going to pay a big price for right after
the election the facts are though the
facts are the American people are
hurting these people are hurting in the
inner cities we're shipping the
low-paying job paying jobs overseas what
our low paying jobs textile shoes things
like that do we say or yesterday's
industries they're tomorrow's industries
in the inner city let me say in my case
if I'm out of work I'll cut grace
tomorrow to take care of my family I'll
be happy to make shoes I'd be happy to
make clothing I'll make sausage you just
give me a job
put those jobs in the inner cities and
started doing diplomatic deals and
shipping them to China where prison
labor doesn't work mr. Perot
everybody thought he won that first
debate because you were plain speaking
and you made it sound
oh so simple we'll just do it what makes
you think that you're going to be able
to get the Democrats and Republicans
together any better than these guys if
you ask me if I could fire fly a fighter
plane or launcher you'd be an astronaut
I can't I've spent my life creating jobs
that's something I know how to do and
very simply in the inner city they're
starved see small businesses is the way
to jumpstart to inner-city not are you
answering my question you want jobs he
understand do you want jobs the inner
city is hell I want you to tell me how
you're going to be able to get the
Republicans and Democrats in Congress to
gether better than well Stu gentlemen I
have listened to both sides and if they
would talk to one another instead of
throwing rocks I think we could get a
lot done and among other things I would
say okay over here in this Senate
Committee to the Chairman who is anxious
to get this bill passed the president is
anxious
I'd say rather than just yelling at one
another why don't we find out where we
apart try to get together get the bill
passed and give the people the benefits
and not play party politics right now
and I think the first would follow that
so closely that probably they would get
it done that's the way I would do it
they'll give me the chance but I will
drop everything and go work on it okay I
have a question here
my question was originally for governor
Clinton but I think would welcome a
response from all three candidates as
you are aware crime is rampant in our
cities and in the Richmond area and I'm
sure it's happened elsewhere 12-year
olds are carrying guns to school mm-hmm
and I'm sure when our founding fathers I
wrote the Constitution they did not mean
for the right to bear arms to apply it
to twelve year olds so I'm asking where
do you stand on gun control and what do
you plan to do about it governor Clinton
I support the right to keep and bear
arms I live in a state where over half
the adults have hunting and fishing
licenses are both but I believe we have
to have some way of checking handguns
before they're sold to check the
criminal history the mental health
history and the age of people who are
buying them therefore I support the
brady bill which would impose a national
waiting period unless and until a state
did what only Virginia has done now
which is to automate its records once
you automate your records then you don't
have to have a waiting period but at
least you can check I also think we
should have frankly restrictions on
assault weapons whose only purpose is to
kill we need to give the police a
fighting chance in our urban areas where
the gangs are building up the third
thing I would say it doesn't bear
directly on gun control but it's very
important we need more police on the
street there is a crime bill which would
put more police on the street which was
kill for this session by a filibuster in
the Senate mostly by Republican senators
and I think it's a shame it didn't pass
I think it should be made the law but it
had the Brady Bill in it the waiting
period I also believe that we should
offer college scholarships the people
who will agree to work them off as
police officers and I think as we reduce
our military forces we should let people
earn military retirement by coming out
and working as police officers there 30
years ago there were three police
officers on the street for every crime
today there are three crimes for every
police officer
in the communities which have had real
success putting police officers near
schools where kids carry weapons to get
the weapons out of school or on the same
blocks you've seen crime go down in
Houston there's been a 15 percent drop
in the crime rate in the last year
because of the work the mayor did there
and increasing the police force so I
know it can work I've seen it happen
Thank You president Porsche I think you
put your finger on a major problem I
talked about strengthening the American
family and it's very hard to strengthen
the family if people are scared to walk
down to the corner store and you know
send their kid down to get her loaf of
bread it's very hard I have been
fighting for very strong anti-crime
legislation
habeas corpus reform so you don't have
these endless Appeals so when something
somebody gets sentenced hey this is for
real I've been fighting for changes in
the exclusionary rules so if an honest
cop stops somebody it makes a technical
mistake the criminal doesn't doesn't go
away I'll probably get into a fight in
this room with some but I happen to
think that we need stronger death
penalties for those that kill police
officers Virginia's on the lead in this
as governor Clinton properly said on
this identification system for firearms
I am NOT for National Registration of
firearms some of the states that have
the toughest anti gun laws have the
highest levels of crime I am for the
right as the governor says I'm sportsman
and I don't think you ought to eliminate
all kinds of weapons but my eye I was
not for the bill that he was talking
about because it was not tough enough on
the criminal I'm very pleased that the
Fraternal Order of Police and Little
Rock Arkansas endorsed me because I
think they see I'm trying to strengthen
the anti-crime legislation we've got
more money going out for local police
than than any previous administration so
we've got to get it under control and
there's one last thing point I'd make
drugs we have got to win our national
strategy against drugs to fight against
drugs we're making some progress doing a
little better on interdiction we're not
doing as well
amongst amongst the the people that
would get to be a habitual drug users
the good news is I think it's true in
Richmond teenage use is down of cocaine
substantially 60% in the last couple of
years so we're making progress but until
we get that one done we're not going to
solve the neighborhood crime problem mr.
Poirot there are young black males in
America dying at unprecedent agreement
on this yes I know you're gonna let okay
okay that homicide is the leading cause
of death among young black males 15 to
24 years of old what are you going to do
to get the guns off the street on any
program and this includes crime you'll
find we have all kinds of great plans
lying around that never get enacted into
law and implemented I don't care what it
is
with competitiveness health care crime
you name it Brady bill I agree with that
it's a timid step in the right direction
but it won't fix it so why is a law that
won't fix it now what it really boils
down to is can you live we have become
so preoccupied with the rights of the
criminal that we've forgotten the rights
of the innocent and in our country we
have evolved to a point where we put
millions of innocent people in jail
because you go to the poor neighborhoods
and they put bars on their windows and
bars on their doors and put themselves
in jail to protect the things that they
are fired legitimately that's where we
are we have got to become more concerned
about people who play by the rules
and get the balance we require this is
going to take first building a consensus
at grassroots America right from the
bottom up the American people have got
to say they want it and at that point we
can pick from a variety of plans and
develop new plans and the way you get
things done is bury ourselves in the
room with one another put together the
best program take it to American people
use the electronic town hall the kind of
thing you're doing here tonight build a
consensus and then do it and then go on
to the next one but don't just sit here
slow dancing for four years doing
nothing thank you thank you mr. Perot we
have a question up here please state
your position on term limits and if in
you are in favor of them how will you
get them enacted
any order I'd be glad to respond thank
you
I strongly support term limits for
members of the United States Congress I
believe it would return the government
closer to the people in a way that Ross
Perot is talking about the president's
terms are limited to to a total of eight
years
what's wrong with llama limiting the
terms of members of Congress to 12
Congress has gotten kind of
institutionalized for 38 years one party
has controlled the House of
Representatives in the result
sorry little post office that can't you
know can't do anything right in a bank
that has more overdraft than all the
Chase Bank and Citibank put together
we've got to do something about it and I
think you get a certain arrogance
bureaucratic arrogance if people stay
there too long and so I am favor
strongly favor term limits and you had
to get them passed send us some people
little it'll pass the idea and I think
you will I think the American people
want it now every place I go I talk
about it and I think they want it done
actually you'd have to have some
amendments to the Constitution because
the way the Constitution read Thank You
governor Clinton I know they're popular
but I'm against them
I'll tell you why I believe number one
it would pose a real problem for a lot
of smaller states in the Congress would
have enough trouble now making sure
their interests are heard number two I
think it would increase the influence of
unpay unelected staff members in the
Congress who have too much influence
already I want to cut the size of the
congressional staffs but I think you're
going to have too much influence there
with people who are never elected they
have lots of expertise number three if
the people really have a mind to change
they can you're gonna have a hundred
twenty to 150 new members of Congress
now let me tell you what I favor instead
I favor strict controls on how much you
can spend running for Congress strict
limits on political action committees
requirements that people running for
Congress appear in open public debates
like we're doing now if you did that you
could take away the the incumbents
advantage
because challengers like me would have a
chance to run against incumbents like
him permit for house races and Senate
races and then the voters could make up
their own line without being subject to
an unfair fight so that's how I feel
about it and I think if we had the right
kind of campaign reform we'd get the
changes you want mr. Perot would you
like to address certain limitations yes
let me do it on first on a personal
level if the American people send me up
to do this job I intend to be there one
term I do not intend to spend one minute
of one day thinking about reelection and
as a matter of principle and my
situation is unique and I understand it
I would take absolutely no compensation
I go is there servant now I have set is
strong an example as I can then at that
point when we sit down with Capitol Hill
tomorrow night I'm gonna be talking
about government reform it's a long
subject you wouldn't let me finish
tonight if you want to hear it you get
it tomorrow night tomorrow night but we
have got to reform government if you put
term limits in and don't reform
government you won't get the benefits
you thought it takes a boat so we need
to do the reforms and the term limits
and after we reform it it won't be a
lifetime career opportunity good people
will go serve and then go back to their
homes and not become foreign lobbyists
and cash in at 30,000 bucks a month and
then take time off to run some
president's campaign yeah this there are
nice people they're just in a bad system
I don't think they're any villains but
boys a system problem thank you very
much we have a question over here I'd
like to ask Governor Clinton do you
attribute the rising cost of health care
to the medical profession itself or do
you think the problem lies elsewhere and
what specific proposals do you have to
tackle this problem I've had more people
talk to me about their health care
problems I guess than anything else all
across America
you know people who lost their jobs lost
their businesses I had to give up their
jobs because of sick children and so let
me try to answer you in this way let's
start with a premise we spend 30% more
of our income than any nation on earth
on health care and yet we ensure fewer
people we have 35 million people that
the insurance at all and I see them all
the time a hundred thousand Americans a
month have lost their health insurance
just in the last four years so if you
analyze where we're out of line with
other countries you come up with the
following conclusions number one we
spend at least sixty billion dollars a
year on insurance administrative costs
bureaucracy and government regulation
that wouldn't be spent in any other
nation so we have to to have in my
judgment a drastic simplification of the
basic health insurance policies of this
country be very comprehensive for
everybody
employers would cover their employees
government would cover the unemployed
number two I think you have to take on
specifically the insurance companies and
require them to make some significant
change in the way they rate people into
big community pools I think you have to
tell the pharmaceutical companies they
can't keep raising drug prices at three
times the rate of inflation I think you
have to take on medical fraud I think
you have to help doctors stop practicing
defensive medicine I've recommended that
our doctors be given a set of national
practice guidelines and that if they
follow those guidelines that raises the
presumption that they didn't do anything
wrong I think you have to have a system
of primary and preventive clinics in our
inner cities in our rural areas so
people can have access to health care
the key is to control the cost and
maintain the quality to do that you need
a system of managed competition where
all of us are covered in big groups and
we can choose our doctors and our
hospitals across a wide range but there
is an incentive to control cost and I
think there has to be
I think mr. Perot and I agree on this
there has to be a national commission of
health care providers and health care
consumers that set ceilings to keep
health costs in line with inflation plus
population growth now let me say some
people say we can't do this but Hawaii
does it they cover 98 percent of their
people and their insurance premiums are
much cheaper than the rest of America
and so does Rochester New York
they now have a plan to cover everybody
their premiums are 2/3 the rest of the
country this is very important it's a
big human problem and a devastating
economic problem for America and I'm
going to send a plan to do this within
the first hundred days of my presidency
it's terribly important thank you sorry
to cut you short but President Bush
health care reform
I just have to say so I don't want to
stampede Ross was very articulate across
the country I don't want anybody to
Stampede to cut the president's salary
off altogether Barbara is sitting over
here and hi thank you but what I have
proposed 10% cut downsize the government
and we can get that done she asked a
question I think is whether the health
care profession was that was to blame no
one thing to blame is these malpractice
lawsuits they are breaking the system it
cost 20 to 25 billion dollars a year and
I want to see those outrageous claims
capped doctors don't dare to deliver
babies sometimes because they're afraid
that somebody's gonna sue them people
don't dare medical practitioners to help
somebody along the highway well that are
hurt because they're afraid that some
lawyers gonna come along and get a big
lawsuit so you can't blame the
practitioners the health profit and my
program is this keep the government as
far out of it as possible make insurance
available to the poorest of the poor
through vouchers next range and the
income bracket through through tax
credits and get on about the business of
pooling insurance a great big company
can buy Ross got a good sized company
been very successful he can buy
insurance cheaper than mom-and-pop store
in the corner but if those mom-and-pop
stores all get together in Poole they
too can bring the cost of insurance down
so I want to keep the quality of
healthcare that means keep government
out of it I want to do better I don't
like this idea of these boards it all
sounds to me like you're going to have
some government setting price I want
competition and I want to pull the
insurance and get and take care of it
that way and here's the other point I
think medical care should go with the
person if you leave a business I think
your insurance should go with you to
some other business you shouldn't be
worrying if you get a new job as to
whether that's gonna and part of our
plan is to make it what they call
portable big word but that means if
you're working for the Jones company you
go to the Smith company your insurance
goes with you I think it's a good
program I'm really excited about getting
it done - mr. Perot we have the most
expensive health care system in the
world 12% of our gross
no product goes to healthcare my
industrial competitors who are beating
us in competition spend less and have
better healthcare
Japan spends a little over six percent
of its gross national product Germany
spends eight percent it's fascinating
you brought a front row box seat and
you're not happy with your health care
and you're saying night we've got bad
health care but very expensive health
care it's folks here's why go home and
look in the mirror you own this country
but you have no voice in it the way it's
organized now and if you want to have a
high risk experience comparable to
bungee jumping go into Congress sometime
when they're working on this kind of
legislation when the lobbyists are
running down up and down the halls where
are your safety toe shoes when you go
and as a private citizen believe me you
are looked on as a major nuisance the
facts are you now have a government that
comes at you you're supposed to have a
government that comes from you now there
are all kinds of good ideas brilliant
ideas terrific ideas on health care none
of them ever get implemented because let
me give you an example senator runs
every six years he's got to raise 20,000
bucks a week to have enough money to run
who's he gonna listen to us or the folks
running up and down the house with money
the lobbyists the PAC money he listens
to them who do they represent health
care industry not us
now you've got to have a government that
comes from you again you've got to
reassert your ownership in this country
and you've got to completely reform our
government and at that point there just
be like apples falling out of a tree the
programs would be good because the
elected officials will be listening to I
said the other night I was all ears
and I would listen to any good idea I
think we ought to do plastic surgery on
a lot of these guys so that they are all
ears too and listen to you then you get
what you want and shouldn't you hey you
paid for it
why shouldn't you get what you want as
opposed to what some lobbyist cuts the
deal rights the little piece in the law
he goes through that's the way the games
played now did you change it you're
gonna be unhappy Thank You governor
Clinton you wanted one brief point in
every point we have election so people
can make decisions about this the point
I want to make to you is bipartisan
Commission reviewed my plan and the bush
plan
and concluded were maybes Republicans is
democratic healthcare experts on it they
concluded that my plan would cover
everybody and his would leave 227
million behind by the year 2000 and that
my plan in the next 12 years would say
2.2 trillion dollars in public and
private money to reinvest in this
economy and the average family would say
$1,200 a year under the plan that I
offered without any erosion in the
quality of health care so I asked you to
look at that and you have to vote for
somebody we're the plan that's what you
have elections for it if people say well
he got elected to do this then the
Congress says okay I'm going to do it
that's what the election was about brief
governor Clinton thank you we have a
question right here yes how has national
debt
personally affected each of your lives
and if it hasn't how can you honestly
find a cure for the economic problems of
the common people if you have no
experience and what's ailing them well
it tells me to disrupt my private life
in my business to get involved in this
activity that's how much I care about it
and believe me if you knew my family and
if you knew the private life I have you
would agree in a minute that that's a
whole lot more fun than getting involved
in politics but I became I have lived
the American dream I came from very
modest background
nobody's been luckier than I've been all
the way across the spectrum and the
greatest riches of all of my wife and
children just is to it that's true of
any family but I want all the children I
want these young people up here to be
able to start with nothing but an idea
like I did and build a business but
they've got to have a strong basic
economy and if you're in debt you're
it's like having a ball and chain around
you I'm doing I just figure as lucky as
I've been I owe it to them in our to the
future generations and on a very
personal basis oh it to my children and
grandchildren well I think the national
debt affects everybody
obviously it has a lot to do with
interest rates
it has she's saying you personal
personal basis how has it affected you
has it affected you personally well I'm
sure it has I love my branch
grandchildren I want to think that I
want to think think that they're going
to be able to afford an education I
think that that's an important part of
being a parent if the question if your
so maybe I won't get it wrong are you
suggesting that if somebody has means
that the national debt doesn't affect
them I'm not sure I get it help me with
a question and I'll try to answer I've
had friends that have been laid off your
job I know people who cannot afford to
pay the mortgage on their homes their
car payment I have personal problems
with national debt but how has it
affected you and if you have no
experience in it how can you help us
if you don't know we're feeling she
means more the recession the economic
problems today the country faces rather
than any water you ought to be in the
White House for a day and hear the what
I hear and see what I see and read the
mail I read and touch the people that I
touch from time to time I was in the
Lomax
AME Church it's a black church just
outside of Washington DC and I read in
the in the bulletin about teenage
pregnancies about the difficulty that
families are having the medians make
ends meet I talk to parents I mean you
got to care everybody cares that people
aren't doing well but I don't think it I
don't think it's fair to say you haven't
had cancer therefore you don't know what
it's like I don't think it's fair to say
you know whatever it is if you haven't
been hit by it personally but everybody
is affected by the debt because of the
tremendous interest that goes into
paying on that debt everything is more
expensive everything comes out of your
pocket in my pocket so it's it's that
but I think in terms of the recession of
course you feel it when you're President
of the United States that's why I'm
trying to do something about it by
stimulating the export vesting more
better education system
clarified so many how it's affected you
again
you know people who lost their house
their home well I've been governor of a
small state for 12 years
I'll tell you how it's affected me every
year Congress and the President signed
laws that makes a make us do more things
it gives us less money to do it with I
see people in my state middle class
people their taxes have gone up in
Washington and their services have gone
down while the wealthy have gotten tax
cuts I have seen what's happened in this
last four years when in my state when
people lose their jobs there's a good
chance I'll know them by their names
when a factory closes I know the people
who ran it when the businesses go
bankrupt I know them and I've been out
here for 13 months meeting in meetings
just like this ever since October with
people like you all over America people
that have lost their jobs lost their
livelihood lost their health insurance
what I want you to understand is the
national debt is not the only cause of
that it is because America has not
invested in its people it is because we
have not grown is because we've had 12
years of trickle-down economics we've
gone from 1st to 12th in the world and
wages we've had for years where we
produced no private sector jobs most
people are working harder for less money
than they were making 10 years ago it is
because we are in the grip of a failed
economic theory and this decision you're
about to make better be about what kind
of economic theory you want not just
people saying I'm gonna go fix it but
what are we going to do I think we have
to do is invest in American jobs
American education control American
health care costs and bring the American
people together again
Thank You governor Clinton we are a
little more than halfway through this
program and I'm glad that we're getting
the diversity of questions that we are
and I don't want to forget these folks
on the wings over here so let's go over
here to have a question my name is Ben
Smith I work in the financial field
counseling retirees and I'm personally
concerned about three major areas one is
the Social Security Administration or
trust fund is projected to be insolvent
by the year 2036 and we funded the trust
fund with our use in the form of
Treasury bonds the pension guarantee
which backs up our private retirement
plans for retirees is projected to be
bankrupt by the year 2026 not to mention
the cutbacks by private companies and
Medicare is projected to be bankrupt
maybe as soon as 1997 and I would like
from each of you a specific response as
to what you intend to do for retirees
relative to these issues not
generalities but specifics because I
think there are very disturbing issues
President Bush may we start with you
well the Social Security you're an
expert and I could I'm sure learn from
you the details of the pension guarantee
fund and the social security fund the
Social Security system was fixed about
five years and I think it's projected
out to be sound beyond that so at least
we have time to work with it but on all
of these things a sound economy is the
only way to get it going
growth in the economy is going to add to
these add to the overall prosperity and
wealth I can't give you a specific
answer on pension guarantee fund all I
know is that we have firm government
credit to guarantee the pensions and
that is very important but it's it's the
Full Faith and Credit of the United
States in space and in spite of our
difficulties is still pretty good it's
still the most respected credit so I
would simply say as these dates get
close you're going to have to reorganize
and refix as we did with the Social
Security Fund and I think that's the
only answer but the the most more
immediate answer is to do what this lady
was suggesting we do and that is to get
this deficit down and get on without
adding to the lows and then restructure
one thing I've called for that has been
stymied and I'll keep on working for it
is a whole financial reform legislation
it is absolutely essential in terms of
bringing our banking system and credit
system into the new age instead of
having it living back in the dark ages
and it's a big fight and I don't want to
give my friend Ross another shot at me
here but I am fighting with the Congress
to get this through and you can't just
go up and say I'm going to fix it you
got some pretty strong world guys up
there that
argue with you but that's what the
elections about I agree with the
governor that's what the election is
about and sound fiscal policy is the
best answer I think to the to the all
the three problems you mentioned Thank
You mr. Perot
just on the broad issue here when you're
trying to solve a problem you get the
best plans you have a raging debate
about those plans then out of that
debate with leadership comes consensus
then and if the plans are huge and
complex like health care I would urge
you to implement pilot programs like the
old car versus measure twice cut once
yeah let's make sure there's things as
good as we all think it is at the end of
the meeting then finally our government
passes laws and freezes the plan in
concrete anybody that's ever built a
successful business will tell you you
optimized optimize optimize if you put
something into effect the reason
Medicare and Medicaid or amasses
refrozen everybody knows how to fix them
there are people all over the federal
government if they could just touch it
with a screwdriver could fix it now back
over here see we've got a four trillion
dollar debt and only in America would
you have 2.8 trillion of it or 70% of it
financed five years or less now that's
another thing to think about when you go
home tonight
you don't finance long-term debt with
short term money why did our government
do it to get the interest rates down a
1% increase in interest rates and that
2.8 trillion dollars is twenty eight
billion dollars a year now when you look
at what Germany pays for money and what
we don't pay for money
you realize is quite a spread right and
you realize this is a temporary thing
and there's gonna be another sucking
sound that runs our deficit through the
roof you know and everybody's ducking it
so I'm gonna say it that we are not
letting that surplus stay in the bank we
are not investing that surplus like a
pension fund we are spending that
surplus to make the deficit look smaller
to you than it really is
now that's put you in jail in corporate
America if you kept books that way but
in government it's just kind of the way
things are that's because he comes at
you not from you now there that money
needs to be they don't even pay interest
on they just write a note for the
interest mr. Perot can you wrap it up
but
see do you want to fix the problem or
soundbite it I understand the importance
of time but see here's how we get to
this mess we're in this was just one of
a thousand now then it's an island
there's one way out a growing expanding
job base a growing expanding job base to
generate the funds and the tax revenues
to pay off the massive rebuild America
we got a double hit so if we're four
thousand trillion dollars down we should
have everything perfect but we don't we
got to pay it off and build money to
renew it bill to spend money to renew it
and that's going to take a growing
expanding job base that is priority one
in this country put everybody that's
breathing to work and I'd love to be out
of workers and have to import them like
some of our an industrial miss Cairo I
think sorry I'm sorry
and I don't want to sound bite you but
we are trying to be fair - absolutely I
apologize all right governor Clinton I
think I remember the question and let me
say first of all I want to answer your
specific question but first of all we
all agree that there should be a growing
economy what you have to decide is who's
got the best economic plan and we all
have ideas out there and mr. Bush has a
record so I don't want you to read my
lips and I sure want you to read this I
just I do hope you will read our plans
now specifically specifically one on
Medicare it is not true that everyone
knows how to fix it there are different
ideas the bush plan the pro plan -
clinton it-- we have different ideas i
am convinced having studied health care
for a year hard and talking to hundreds
and hundreds of people all across
america that you cannot control the cost
of Medicare until you control the cost
of private health care and public health
care with managed competition ceiling on
cost and radical reorganization of the
insurance markets you've got to do that
we got to get those costs down number
two with regard to Social Security that
program a lot of you may not know this
it produces a seventy billion dollar
surplus a year Social Security is in
surplus seventy billion dollars six
increases in the payroll tax that means
people with incomes
fifty-one thousand dollars a year less
pay a disproportionately high share of
the federal tax burden which is why
wants the middle-class tax relief what
do we have to do by the time the century
turns we have got to have our deficit
under control we have to work out of so
that surplus is building up so when the
baby boomers like me retire okay number
three on the pension funds I don't know
as much about it but I will say that's
what I would do is to bring in the
pension experts of the country take a
look at it and strengthen the pension
requirements further because it's not
just enough to have the guarantee we had
a guarantee on the SNL's right we had a
guarantee in what happened you picked up
a five hundred billion dollar bill
because of the dumb way the federal
government deregulated so I think we are
going to have to change and strengthen
the pension requirements on private
retirement plans thank you I think we
have a question here on International
Affairs hopefully we've come to a
position where we're in a new world
order and I'd like to know what the
candidates feel our position is in this
new world order and what our
responsibilities are as a superpower
well we have come to that position since
I became president 40 43 44 countries
have gone Democratic no longer
totalitarian no longer living under
dictatorship or a communist rule this is
exciting this is new world order to me
means freedom and democracy I think we
will have a continuing responsibility is
the only remaining superpower to stay
involved if we pull back in some
isolation and say we don't have to do
our share or more than our share anymore
I believe you're going to just ask for
conflagration that will get involved in
in the future NATO for example has kept
the peace for many many years and I want
to see us keep fully staffed in NATO so
we'll continue to guarantee the peace in
Europe but the exciting thing is the
fear of nuclear war is down and you hear
all the bad stuff that's happened on my
watch I hope people will recognize that
this is something pretty good for
mankind I hope they'll think it's good
that democracy and freedom is on the
move and we're going to stay engaged as
long as I'm
working to improve things this you know
it's so easy now to say hey cut out
foreign aid we got a problem at home I
think the United States has to still be
have the Statue of Liberty as a symbol
caring for others we're right this very
minute we're sending supplies in to help
these little starving kids in Somalia
we're trying to get work it's the United
States that's taking the lead and in
humanitarian aid and into Bosnia we're
doing this all around the world yes we
got problems at home
and I think I got a good plan to help
fix those problems at home but because
of our leadership because we didn't
listen to the freeze the nuclear freeze
group you remember freeze it back in
about nineteen to late 70s freeze don't
touch it we're gonna lock it in now or
else we'll have war President Reagan's
had no peace through strength it worked
the Soviet Union is no more and now
we're working to help them become
totally democratic through the freedom
support act that I led on a great
Democratic ambassador Bob Strauss over
there Jim Baker all of us got this thing
passed through cooperation Ross it
worked with cooperation and you're for
that I'm sure helping Russia become
democratic so the New World Order to me
means freedom and democracy keep engaged
do not pull back into isolation and we
are the United States and we have a
responsibility to lead and to guarantee
the security if it hadn't been for us
Saddam Hussein would be sitting on top
of three-fifths of the oil supply of the
world and he'd have nuclear weapons in
the only the United States could do
that's good me care thank you mr. Perot
well it's cost-effective to help Russia
succeed in its revolution it's pennies
on the dollar compared to going back to
the Cold War Russia is still very
unstable they could go back to square
one and worse they're still all the
nuclear weapons are not dismantled I'm
particularly concerned about the
intercontinental weapons the ones who
can hit us
we've got agreements but they're still
layer with all this instability and
breaking into Republic's and all the
Middle Eastern countries going over
there and shopping for weapons we've got
our work cut out for us so we need to
stay right on top of that and
constructively help them move toward
democracy and capitalism
we have to have money to do that we have
to have our people at work see for 45
years we were preoccupied with the Red
Army I suggest now there are number one
preoccupation is red ink in our country
and we've got to put our people back to
work so that we can afford to do these
things we want to do in Russia we cannot
be the policemen for the world any
longer we spent three hundred billion a
year defending the world Germany and
Japan spent around thirty billion
dollars a piece
it's neat if I can get you to defend me
and I can spend all my money building
industry that's a home run for me coming
out of World War two it made sense now
the other superpowers need to do their
part I've closed on this point you can't
be a superpower unless you're an
economic superpower if we're not an
economic superpower where it used to be
and we will no longer be a force for
good throughout the world and if nothing
else gets you excited about rebuilding
our industrial base
maybe that will because it's job one is
to put our people back to work
governor clinton the president mentioned
saddam hussein your vice president and
you have had some words about the
President and Saddam Hussein would you
care to come in I'd rather answer a
question first and I'll be glad to
because the question you ask is
important the end of the Cold War brings
an incredible opportunity for change
winds of freedom blowing around the
world Russia demilitarizing and it also
requires us to maintain some continuity
some bipartisan American commitment to
certain principles and I would just say
there are three things that I would like
to say number one we do have to maintain
the world's strongest defense we may
differ about what the elements of that
are I think the defense needs to be with
fewer people and permanent armed
services but with greater mobility on
the land in the air and on the sea with
a real dedication to continuing
development of high-technology weaponry
and well-trained people I think we're
going to have to work to stop the
proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction we've got to keep going and
tell all those nuclear weapons in Russia
are gone and the other republics number
two if you don't rebuild the economic
strength of this country at home we
won't be a superpower
we can't have any more instances like
what happened when mr. Bush went to
Japan and Japanese Prime Minister said
he felt sympathy for our country we have
to be the strongest economic power in
the world
that's what got me into this race so we
could rebuild the American economy and
number three we need to be a force for
freedom and democracy and we need to use
our unique position to support freedom
whether it's in Haiti or in China or in
any other place wherever the seeds of
freedom are sprouting we can't impose it
but we need to nourish it and that's the
kind of thing that I would do as
president follow those three commitments
into the future okay we have a question
up there yeah we've talked a lot tonight
about creating jobs but we have an awful
lot of high school graduates who don't
know how to read a ruler who cannot fill
out an application for a job how can we
create high paying jobs with the
education system we have and what would
you do to change it thank you well we'd
like to begin the education president
joy yeah I'd be delighted to because you
can't do it the old way you can't do it
with the school bureaucracy controlling
everything and that's why we have a new
program that I hope people have heard
about it's being worked now in 1700
communities bypassed Congress on this
and Roth 1,700 communities across the
country it's called America 2000 and it
literally says to the communities
reinvent the schools not just not just
the bricks and mortar but the curriculum
and everything else think anew we have a
concept called the new American school
corporation where we're doing exactly
that and so I don't I believe that we
got to get the power in the hands of the
teachers not the teachers union what's
happening up there and and and and so
our America 2000 program also says this
it says let's give parents the choice of
a public private or public school from
public private or religious school and
it works it works in Milwaukee
Democratic woman up there
taking the lead in this the mayor up
there on the program in the schools that
are not chosen or improved competition
does that so we've got to innovate
through school choice we've got to
innovate through this America 2000
program but she is absolutely right the
the programs that we've been trying
where you control everything and mandate
it from Washington don't work the
governors and I believe governor Clinton
was in on this but maybe I don't want to
invoke him here but they come to me and
they say please get the Congress to stop
passing so many mandates telling us how
to control things we know better how to
do it in California or Texas or wherever
it is so this is what our program is all
about and I believe it you're right onto
something that if we don't change the
education we're not going to be able to
compete federal funding for education is
up substantially Pell grants are up but
it isn't going to get the job done if we
don't change K through 12 governor
Clinton first of all let me say that I
spent more of my time and life on this
in the last 12 years and any other issue
70% of my state's money goes to public
schools and I was really honored when
Time magazine said that our schools had
shown more improvement than any other
state in the country
except one other they named two states
showing real strides forward in the 80s
so I care a lot about this and I spent
countless hours in schools let me start
with what you said I agree with some of
what mr. Bush said but it's nowhere near
enough
we live in a world where what you earn
depends on what you can learn where the
average 18 year old will change jobs
eight times in a lifetime and where none
of us can promise any of you that what
you now do for a living is absolutely
safe from now on nobody running can
promise that there's too much change in
the world so what should we do
let me real some things off real quick
because you said you wanted specifics
number one under my program we would
provide matching funds to States to
teach everybody with a job to read in
the next five years and give everybody
with a job the chance to get a high
school diploma in big places on the job
number two we would provide two-year
apprenticeship programs to high school
graduates who don't go to college and
community colleges are on the job
number three we'd opened the doors to
college education and high school
graduates without regard to income they
could borrow the money and pay it back
as a percentage of their income or with
a couple of years of service to our
nation here at home
number four we would fully fund a
headstart program to get little kids off
to a good start in five I would have an
aggressive program of school reform more
choices in the I favor public schools or
these new charter schools we can talk
about that if you want I don't think we
should spend tax money on private
schools but I favor public school choice
and I favor radical decentralization and
giving more power to better trained
principals and teachers with parent
councils to control their schools those
things would revolutionize American
education and take us to the top
economically Thank You governor Clinton
what the question is what is it going to
cost what is it going to cost in six
years the I budget all this in my budget
in six years the college program would
cost eight billion dollars over and
above what the present student loan
program costs for you pay three billion
dollars for busted loans because we
don't have an automatic recovery system
and a billion dollars in bank fees so
the net cost of the eight billion six
years from now in a trillion plus budget
not very much the other stuff all the
other stuff I mentioned cost much less
than that the headstart program full
funding would cost about five billion
more and it's all covered in my budget
from the the plans that I've laid out
from raising taxes on families with
incomes above $200,000 and asking
foreign corporations to pay the same tax
that American corporations do on the
same income from a hundred and forty
billion dollars in budget cuts including
what I think are very prudent cuts in
the defense budget it's all comes to
Perot you want education please yes I've
got scars to show for being around
education reform and the first word you
need to say in every city and state and
just draw a line in the sand the public
schools exist for the benefit of the
children you got to see a lot of people
fall over because any time you're
spending 199 billion dollars a year
somebody's getting it and the children
get lost in the process so that's step
one keep in mind in 1961 our schools
were the envy of the world we were
spending 16 billion dollars on them now
we spend more than any other
nation in the world 199 billion a year
and ranked the bottom the industrialized
world in terms of education achievement
one more time you bought a front row box
seat and got a third-rate performance
it's the government that's not serving
you mine largest should be local the
more local the better interesting
phenomenon small towns have good Scoob
big cities have terrible scoops the best
people in a small town will serve on the
school board you get into big cities
it's political patronage stepping stones
you get the job give your relatives the
janitors jobs and fifty seven thousand
dollars a year more than the teachers
make and with luck they clean the
cafeteria once a week now you're paying
for that those schools belong to you
and we put up with that and as long as
you put up with that that's what you're
going to get and these folks are just
dividing up one hundred ninety nine
billion bucks and children get lost if I
could wish for one thing for great
public schools would be a strong family
unit in every home nothing will ever
replace that you say well gee what are
you gonna do about that well the White
House is a bully pulpit and I think we
ought to be pounding on the table every
day there's nothing the most efficient
unit of government the world will ever
know there's a strong loving family unit
next thing you need small schools not
big scoops a little school everybody
somebody individualism is very important
these big factories everybody told me
they were cost-effective I did a study
on it their cost-ineffective 5,000
students why is a high school that big
one reason sooner or later we get 11 or
more boys it can run like the devil away
250 pounds and they might win district
now that has nothing to do with learning
secondly across Texas typically half the
school day was non academic pursuits in
one place was 35 percent in Texas you
could have unlimited absences to go to
livestock shows
found a boy it's excuse me but you got
this gives the flavor boy in Houston
kept a chicken in the bathtub in
downtown Houston miss 65 days going to
livestock shows finally had to come back
to school the chicken lost his feathers
that's the only way we got him back
that's your tax money being wasted now
neighborhood schools it is terrible to
bus a tiny little children across town
and it is particularly terrible to take
four tiny little children and wait until
the first grade and bust them across
town to Mars where the children know
their numbers know their letters have
had every advantage then the first day
that little child wants out I'll close
on this you got to have world class
teachers world class books if you ever
got close to how textbooks were selected
you wouldn't want to go back to second
day I don't have time to tell you the
stories no you don't we don't fix this
you're right we can't have the
industries of tomorrow unless we have
the best educated workforce and here
you've got for the disadvantaged
children you've got to have early
childhood development cheapest money
you'll ever spend
first contact should be with the mother
when she's pregnant that little child
needs to be loved and hugged and
nurtured and made to feel special like
your children were they learn to think
well or poorly themselves in 18 months
thank you in the first few years they
even learn how to learn or don't know
how to learn how to learn and if they
don't they wind up in prison
thank you sort of imprisonment it does
to send him to Harvard I rest my case
thank you President Bush you wanted to
well I just had word of clarification
because if something governor Clinton
said my school choice program GI bill
for kids does not take public money and
give it a private schools it does what
the GI Bill itself did when I came out
of World War two takes public money and
gives it to families or individuals to
choose the school they want and where
it's been done those schools like in
Rochester those schools that weren't
chosen find that they then compete and
do better so I I think it's worth a shot
we've got a pilot program it ought to be
tried school choice public private or
religious not to the schools but to you
know 46% of the teachers in Chicago
public school teachers send their kids
to private school now I think we ought
to try to help families and see if it
will do what I think make all schools
better I just want to mention if I could
just to marry briefly very briefly
involving the parents in the preschool
education their kids even if they're
poor and uneducated can make a huge
difference we have a big program in my
state that teaches mothers our fathers
to teach their kids to get ready for
school it's the most successful thing
we've ever done just a fat clarification
real quickly we do not spend a higher
percentage of our income on public
education than every other country there
are nine countries that spend more than
we do on public education we spend more
on education because we spend so much
more on colleges but if you look at
public education alone and you take it
into account the fact that we have more
racial diversity and more poverty it
makes a big difference there are great
public schools where there's public
school choice accountability and
brilliant principles I'll just mention
one the beasley academic center in
Chicago I commend it to any bites as
good as any private school in the
country we have very little time left
and it occurs to me that we have talked
all this time and there has not been one
question about some of the racial
tensions and ethnic tensions in America
is there anyone in this audience that
would like to pose a question to the
candidates on this yes
what I'd like to know and this is to any
of the three of you is aside from the
recent accomplishments of your party
aside from those accomplishments in
racial representation and without citing
any of your current appointments or
successful elections when do you
estimate your party will both nominate
and elect an afro-american and female
ticket to the presidency United States
governor Clinton why don't you answer
that first well I don't have any idea
but I hope it will happen sometime in my
lifetime I believe that this country is
electing more and more African Americans
and Latinos and Asian Americans who are
representing districts that are
themselves not necessarily of a majority
of their race the American people are
beginning to vote across racial lines
and I hope it will happen more and more
more and more women are being elected
look at all these women Senate
candidates we have here and you know
according to my mother my wife and my
daughter this world would be a lot
better place if women were running it
most of the time I do think there are
special experiences and judgments and
backgrounds and understandings that
women bring to this process by the way
this this lady said here
how have you been affected by the
economy I mean women know what it's like
to be paid an unequal amount for equal
work they know what it's like not to
have flexible working hours they know
what it's like not to have family leave
or childcare so I think it would be a
good thing for America that happened and
and I think it will happen in my
lifetime
okay I'm sorry we have just a little bit
time left let's try to get responses
from each of them
President Bush sure mister Barbara Bush
were running this year she'd be elected
but it's too late you don't want us to
mention appointees but when you see the
quality of people in our administration
see how Colin Powell performed I say
administration he's in him you weren't
impressed with the fact that he excuse
me I'm extremely but wouldn't that
convince suggests to the American people
then here's a quality person if he
decided that he could automatically get
the nomination of either party yes
I'm totally impressed with that I just
want those ones you're ghetto I win you
mean time yeah I don't know starting
after four years I think you'll see more
minority and women candidates coming
forward it's supposed to be the women's
year are the women in the Senate let's
see how they do I don't want to cut you
off anymore but we only have a minute
left I have a fearless forecast unless
he just won't do it
: power will be on somebody's take it
four years from now envision right right
hey you you you wanted that's it four
years
how about a woman now if he won't be
gentle water it would be a concern yeah
you say why do you keep peeking thinking
military people these these are people
that I just happen to know and have a
high regard for I'm sure they're
hundreds of others event dr. Liz
Sullivan absolutely
yeah good man what about a woman okay
I can I can think of many many
absolutely all right how about Sandra
Day O'Connor example knock your
Bernadine Healy good National Institute
of Health all right I'll yield the floor
thanks a lot thank you thank you I want
to apologize to our audience because
there were 209 people here and there
were 209 questions we only got to a
fraction of them and I'm sorry to those
of you that didn't get to ask your
questions but we must move to the
conclusion of the program it is time now
for the two-minute closing statements
and by prior agreement President Bush
will go first
may I ask for an exception because I
think we owe Carole Simpson hey anybody
can stand in between these three
characters here and get the job done we
owe her a round of applause
don't take it out of my time I feel
strong no but let me just say to the
American people in two-and-a-half weeks
we're going to choose who should sit in
this Oval Office who to lead the
economic recovery who to be the leader
of the free world who to get the deficit
down three ways to do that one is to
raise taxes one is to reduce spending
controlling that mandatory spending
another one is to invest in save and to
stimulate growth I do not want to raise
taxes I differ with the two here on that
I'm just not going to do that I do
believe that we need to control
mandatory spending and I think we need
to invest and save more I believe that
we need to educate better and retrain
better I believe that we need to export
more so I'll keep working for export
agreements where we can sell more abroad
and I believe that we must strengthen
the family we've got to strengthen the
family now let me pose this question to
America if in the next five minutes
television announcer came on and said
there is a major international crisis
there is a major threat to the world or
in this country a major threat my
question is who if you were appointed to
name one of the three of us who would
you choose who has the perseverance the
character the integrity the maturity to
get the job done I hope I'm that person
thank you very very much
Thank You mr. president and now a
closing statement from mr. Perot if the
American people want to do it and not
talk about it then they all - you know
I'm one person I ought to consider if
they just want to keep slow-dancing and
talk about it and not doing I'm not your
man I am results-oriented I'm
action-oriented I built my businesses
getting things done in three months if
my competitors took 18 months to do
everybody says you can't do that with
Congress sure you can do that with
Congress Congress is they're all good
people they're all Patriots but you got
a link arms
work with them sure you'll have
arguments sure you'll have fights we
have them all day every day but we get
the job done now I have to come back in
my clothes to one thing because I am
passionate about education I was talking
about early childhood education for
disadvantaged little children and let me
tell you one specific pilot program
where children who don't have a chance
go to this program one near three now
we're going back to when the mothers
pregnant they'll start right after
they're born but going starting one two
three and going to list school until
they're nine and then going into the
public school in the fourth grade ninety
percent or on the honor roll now that
will change America those children will
all go to college they will live the
American dream and I beg the American
people any time they think about
reforming education to take this piece
of society that doesn't have a chance
and take these little pieces of clay
that can be shaped and molded and give
them the same love and nurture and
affection and support you give your
children and teach them they're very
unique and that they're precious and
there's only one person in the world
like them and you will see this nation
blooming and we will have so many people
who are qualified for the top job that
it will be terrific yeah finally if you
can't pay the bills you're dead in the
water
and we have got to put our nation back
to work now if you don't want to really
do that I'm not your man I'd go crazy
sitting up there slow dancing that one
in other words that's we're going to do
it then pick somebody who won't likes to
talk about it now just remember when you
think about me I didn't create this mess
I've been paying taxes just like you and
lord knows I've paid my share over a
billion dollars in taxes for a guy who
started out with everything he owns and
truckers are once again it's in your
hands I wish you well I'll see you
tomorrow night and finally last but not
least Governor Clinton Thank You Carol
and thank you ladies and gentlemen since
I suggested this format I hope it's been
good for all of you I really tried to be
faithful to your request that we answer
the questions specifically and pointedly
I thought I owed that to you and I
respect you for being here and for the
impact you've had on making this a more
positive experience these problems are
not easy they're not gonna be solved
overnight but I want you to think about
just two or three things first of all
the people of my state have let me be
their governor for 12 years because I
made commitments to two things more jobs
and better schools our schools are now
better our children get off to a better
start from preschool programs and
smaller classes in the early grades and
we had one of the most aggressive adult
education programs in the country we
talked about that this year my state
ranks first in the country in job growth
fourth and manufacturing job growth
fourth an income growth fourth in the
decline of poverty I'm proud of that it
happened because I could work with
people Republicans and Democrats
that's why we've had 24 retired generals
and admirals hundreds of businesspeople
many of them Republican support this
campaign you have to decide whether you
want to change or not we do not need
four more years of an economic theory
that doesn't work we've had 12 years of
trickle-down economics it's time to put
the American people first to invest and
grow this economy I'm the only person
who's ever balanced the government
budget and I've presented 12 of them and
cut spending repeatedly but you cannot
just get there by balancing the budget
we've got to grow the economy by putting
people first real people like you I got
into this race because I did not want my
child to grow up to be part of the first
generation of Americans to do worse than
our parents we're better than that we
can do better than that
I want to make America as great as it
can be and I ask for your help in doing
it thank you very much you governor
Clinton ladies and gentlemen this
concludes the debate sponsored by the
bipartisan Commission on Presidential
Debates I'd like to thank our audience
of 209 on
voters who may leave this evening may be
being committed and hopefully they'll go
to the polls like everyone else on
November 3rd and vote we invite you to
join us on the third and final
presidential debate next Monday October
19th from the campus of Michigan State
University in East Lansing Michigan
I'm Carol Simpson goodnight University
of Richmond is we hear the concluding
remarks from the three presidential
candidates and a gracious and skilled
moderator for tonight Carol Simpson of
ABC News we had 90 minutes of thoughtful
and wide-ranging discussions between
these three candidates and more than 200
voters who were selected by the Gallup
Organization the interest here tonight I
think it's fair to say extends across
the country because in 1992 we are
having an election that is more than a
rite of passage the country seems to
sense that we're in a crucial new era
they discuss the deficit Gunn's term
limits health foreign markets social
security new world order education and
race and in this format we had an
opportunity to see how their minds
worked their personal style all three
men had a strong rotation of their views
no dramatic changes tonight in any of
that at the outset and this is a
decision driven by the voters they were
forced in one way or another to take the
pledge that they would not be dealing
with the character issues which is kind
of a code for personal attacks the
voters were just not interested in
talking about that tonight
the discussions continue now because not
all of these voters could get their
questions in John Chancellor is here
with me John well Tom after Tuesday
night's quail Gore mud-wrestling I
thought we were going to come here and
see Moe Larry and curly hit each other
tonight in a Three Stooges movie what we
got instead I think was an inspiring
performance from three presidential
candidates I think the USIA take this 90
minutes and send it overseas as a
shining example of how well things can
work in presidential politics they
rarely do I thought Bush was far better
than st. Louis Tom he was president okay
and reason there's Tim here's Tim
Russert uh who is right down in the
middle of the mix right now John mr.
president just one question sir - did
she but you wanted to achieve I don't
know we enjoyed the evening very much
these were very intelligent questions I
thought they were excellent do you hope
you can get to the character issue
eventually in some of these debates
I'm I feel very happy with what we did
tonight
very Thank You mr. president thank you
very much Tim Russert there with
President Bush who did not get the
character issue tonight it's something
that it was a situation that he opened
and then it was turned away in effect by
the book by the people who were
assembled here and he came back to it at
the end saying if there's a crisis in
the world who do you trust
Chancellor as you were saying well I
thought that the president took a
deliberate decision and that's the big
story tonight that the aggressiveness
shown by the vice president on Tuesday
night in the pin the debate with Gore
was not continued it didn't happen here
and although Tom I think you have just
said and I certainly agree that the
format we saw here tonight was one of
the best formats for a presidential
debate I have ever seen I've been going
to these since 1960 and this was was
really elevated in first class the
president could have brought up the
character issue time and time again so
it was a deliberate political decision
on the part of the Republican campaign
not to do it and that I think is the big
news of tonight I thought Ross Perot Tom
looked wanted to look more like an
insider tonight than he did in previous
debates and I thought Clinton was
certainly the most political and maybe
the most persuasive of them all what did
you think well I think that that was
probably the case they all had very
strong presentations but this is a four
methods as Bill Clinton said it was his
idea and for good reason he's been
practicing across the country now for
the past 12 months in these kinds of
formats and it's a natural outgrowth of
the way he practices politics in
Arkansas
it's hard to beat Ross Perot for the
snappy one-liners though the giant
sucking sound he said that's votes going
south now let's go down to Tim Russert I
think he's there with Bill Clinton
I am indeed Tom and again he's talking
to some position
just this operation is $4,000 and you go
50 miles away and the operation might be
$8,000
the only way you're ever going to
correct that is if you have a system
that tries to control the cost for
private insurers and the public sector
no nation is controlled healthcare costs
without a comprehensive system we're
gonna we're gonna come back up here cuz
we're about to have Ross Perot sit down
with us I think we'll be back with more
from Richmond in a moment and shortly
we'll be going to Columbus Ohio where
we'll be talking with a specially
selected group of voters who watched the
debate with us tonight see what they had
to say about their conclusions and that
very representative indeed bellwether
you were just talking about that here's
Ross Perot with us now he said it's a
shameless promotion of his a aid show
tomorrow night on our network we were
grateful for both the for the money and
for the attention as you gave it tonight
let me ask you about some of the things
that you said down here in the course of
this debate you continue to come back to
the idea of an electronic townhall kind
of polling the country but you say that
you're going to go to Washington get
things done won't that would cause even
greater gridlock if every time you want
to make a decision you wire the country
and then the special interest groups
will get involved in that and they'll be
making the vote here with these
30-minute shows I love all the guys that
understand public the American people
said they'll never watch that show when
I did my first show because the American
people have a five-minute attention span
so many millions watched it I had to run
it again look at the size the audience
tomorrow night the American people are
thirsty for knowledge they'd like to
know about these programs before we put
them in no this will facilitate getting
it done because they'll get excited
about these things that we need to do
there'll be consensus they'll be tapping
their congressmen on the shoulder and
we'll just execute execute execute and
you said tonight as well that you would
only run for one term now it's a fixed
role in American politics you're gonna
still have to deal with the Danny
Rostenkowski is up there and the John
Dingell from the people who have been in
Congress for a long time and they're
gonna sit back and say well Ross is only
gonna be here for four years we don't
have to deal with him you know we'll
just wait him out
got their mission something the American
people put me on the ballot and I have
millions and millions of people out
there if I get elected this will be the
strangest thing that ever happened in
this country if the people pick the
candidate and put him in the White House
now more powerful than PAC money is the
vote the PAC money is used to buy the
television time to get the vote once
they see people ignore this program
message they send out and go with their
own candidate they're not going to be
slow-dancing me as long as the American
people will stay with me is I've told
the American people I can't get anything
done
that's they'll stay with me Solomon
couldn't solve these problems why is
this man that ever lived
but if grassroots America will stay with
me we can fix it but in the program that
you put forward so far almost everyone
who has looked at it in a non partisan
way for that matter said it's just too
radical it goes too far too quickly
it'll sink this economy it'll put it
into a depression from a recession oh
that didn't come up so I got back in the
race everybody was praising until I got
back in the race now let's not be naive
you know and I know that every newspaper
most newspapers and some of the networks
they picked their candidate of choice at
this point and they are subtly working
to get the American people
we got an anchorman who have a candidate
of choice an anchorwoman I couldn't care
less what is all of that clutter comes
there look at what they said after the
book was published before I came in the
race nobody said that if I came back the
race they had to kill the snake somehow
everybody said nobody would buy my book
then on the bestseller list we can't
believe and the other thing is being
said this week and I just want to get
this as a final question a lot of people
are suggesting that it was just unfair
to put that a great American hero Jim
Stockdale in that debate the other night
because he's a man who has suffered so
much and plainly he was uncomfortable up
there and he and he seemed not to be at
ease at all and what he was doing but
surely you can understand why it was
uncomfortable here is
a hero a Congressional Medal of Honor on
a man who suffered terribly for seven
years for our country a man who's a
scholar he's a professor he had so much
wisdom and after all he's been through
with all of his idealism to see two
young men mud-wrestling therefore the
second highest office in the country
just was a terrible disappointment to
him now in terms of what do you want in
a vice president character he's got him
drink he's a man of steel a man who will
stand on principle and a man who is very
wise and will make the right decisions
for American people sure he's not your
typical song-and-dance politician that's
why I picked it thank you very much mr.
Perot we want to go to New York right
now when we're gonna hear from Mary
Oklahoma was the governor of that state
one final play that was your idea not
mine I want to point that out no that's
true we're grateful for that and
standing by now in New York is the
governor of that state Mario Cuomo
governor you don't have a program
running on NBC tomorrow night so you're
gonna have to make your points right
here no but after being asked 11 times
I'll watch it tomorrow all right let me
ask you about the Bill Clinton economic
program he continued to defend it
tonight but you've been in the same
position that he's about to enter into
if he gets elected president of the
United States is there any doubt in your
mind given the fiscal realities of this
country that he'll have to raise taxes
at a higher level than he's now talking
about in this campaign there's no
telling what the situation will be in
March there's no telling what the
influence of Mitchell Foley and the the
Republicans in the Congress will be this
much is clear I think what Bill Clinton
did today was to take advantage of the
best opportunity he's had in this
campaign to give Americans the fullest
possible view of his positions on all
the major issues I thought it was a
marvelous show what he's saying about
the economy Tom that I think is most
important that Americans should remember
is that there are certain elements that
his solution will insist upon there will
be some tax increases but he will limit
those to the wealthy you do need to
control entitlements but he will not
hurt the needy you do need to cut
defense perhaps more than President Bush
says and you do need
to invest in human resources
infrastructure etc while you control the
deficit those are all the elements you
need what the precise numbers are going
to be you can't say for sure
look if Bill Clinton could do this every
day from now until Election Day Tom I
think he would not only be elected by a
very large margin but it would be easier
for him to govern because the people
would understand what it is that he's
going to ask the Congress for is a great
day for the campaign and for Clinton if
he does get a lot of yell Clinton and he
has a Democratic Congress he has a lot
of big state and big city Democratic
mayor's were going to be at 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue the morning after
his inauguration asking for more help
because absolutely correct all right but
let me tell you Tom what I have told the
people in my state here in New York I am
working harder for Bill Clinton then for
every any candidate I've ever had in a
presidential race I will ask him to do
more for New York City in New York State
the truth in the beginning I do not
expect him to send me a whole lot of
additional money for New York because
what he has to do for this country is
going to make it impossible to be as
generous as he'd like to be for the city
and state so the reality is of course
we'll ask but first he has to do the
things I've just enumerated it's going
to be difficult now he's making it clear
thanks to this format tonight it was a
wonderful wonderful evening all right
thank you very much Governor Mario Cuomo
in in New York tonight in Massachusetts
someone's who's been watching this with
great interest is the Republican
governor of that state William weld who
has been a moderate Republican on some
issues conservative on others and kind
of bipartisan still on others do you
think that the president was penalized
tonight because he was not able to talk
about the character issue as he
described it mr. well well I think the
president came out the winner on the
issues of substance in the debate on
taxes on the deficit on health care on
crime on free trade foreign trade I
thought that Ross Perot was a pretty
good salesman there and if I ran a
used-car lot I think that Perot is
probably the first guy I would hire
maybe Governor Clinton would be the
second guy
but I think if people listen to the
substance of the issues I think the
president is again a winner as he was
overwhelmingly in my view in the first
debate he didn't seem programmed he
wasn't rehearsed he hadn't memorized the
answers he wasn't portraying a president
on TV he was a president he has been a
president and I think that comes through
when when people reflect on the manner
as well as the the substance of what we
have a governor while you're presiding
over a state that's been making some
recovery but it's still in a great deal
of economic pain do you think that the
voters of Massachusetts come November
3rd and say yeah we ought to give George
Bush one more chance four more years
well Massachusetts has been a tough
state in the past but the President had
46 47 percent here last time against a
sitting governor of this state so we're
we're helpful the president has a lot of
ties to the state I think he's going to
run well in New England I think that mr.
Perot being in the race hurts governor
Clinton in the Northeast governor
Clinton finished the poor third in the
primary in Massachusetts I don't think
he won a primary in all of New England
so I have high hopes for the Northeast
governor well thank you very much we're
gonna go back down to the floor of this
debate now at the University of Richmond
NBC's Tim Russert there with Governor
Bill Clinton questions did you achieve
what you want to achieve tonight yeah I
did because we got the people here we
got them into it and I think I thought
all the candidates did well in their
different ways but I believe that I
answered more questions more
specifically than anybody else and
that's what they said they wanted and I
thought they had a right to that that is
I honestly tried to answer every
question and not just make a speech and
I tried to give it very clear specifics
within the time allotted and so I felt
good about it what was the most
important question you think you were
ass tonight
well I think the most important question
we're the ones that had to do with how
we can get our economy going again what
about the debate Monday what do you look
forward to I don't know they're all
different you know the chemistry will be
different but I'm looking forward to it
I enjoy these and I think they're good
for the American people and it's not so
much winners and losers is getting a fix
on what kind of people we are what our
values are what our approaches when you
said the character might come up Monday
what were you referring to well I meant
by that that that mr. Bush will be freer
on Monday to sort of run his standard
campaign than he was tonight these
people didn't want to hear all that they
wanted to know what we're going to do to
change the character to the presidency
and to change the nature of their future
so you know I just was trying to
reinforce their determination to have a
positive debate tonight and you know
Monday he can do whatever he wants but I
think tonight it was important for us
just to answer their questions and if he
raises that issue you'll respond in kind
on Monday let's see what happens to see
what they say and what else governor
thanks for your time back to you Tom
Brokaw thank you Tim Russert with
Governor Bill Clinton we'll be back in a
moment we're going to be going to
Columbus Ohio was a representative group
of voters on both sides taking a look at
what their conclusions were based on
this debate tonight at the University of
Richmond back in a moment
[Music]
decision ninety nine at the Wexner
Center at Ohio State University a
specially selected group of voters have
been watching this debate the
proceedings tonight NBC's Bob Kerr is
there with them let's find out what they
thought about who won who lost and what
they learned from the whole procedure
Bob well Tom first the news at the top
they thought this was the most
successful debate so far they very much
like this format the scoring here goes
as follows
Clinton 26 people thought he won Perot
24 George Bush 2 and this is not a
partisan Democratic crowd that's just
how they thought it came out tonight
let's take Linda crooks Linda would you
stand up for a second Linda is a
financial administrator and you have
been looking all year to validate your
vote last time for George Bush you've
wanted to vote for him again what did
you decide tonight I decide I can't
cannot do that
he's tonight finally it was a little
more specific and as he got more
specific I realize he's not willing to
change too much of anything and I
believe we need to change some things in
this country and I don't believe he's
the man to do it
thank you will you vote for Bill Clinton
possibly I'm still undecided between
Clinton and Perot
let's go to Paul wiesen Bach now and
Paul is a small businessman here in Ohio
Paul you are firm bush coming in and
still yes I am for a couple reasons
I think Bush has been really good for
the company the stock market's up the
Clinton idea of taxing just the upper
two percents not going to work the
economists say that that won't work and
as it works down and all of us are going
to be taxed all right let's move around
a little bit thank you very much let's
move up here Martha Hubbell works in a
bank Martha there was at the end the
classic argument Bill Clinton says let's
change George Bush says if there were a
crisis in the next 30 seconds and
someone came on who would you want in
the Oval Office does that move you I
think Bush would be the person if we
were to go to war because he has the
experience Clinton does not as for the
next four four years
I don't believe George Bush is willing
to change enough in his administration
to help this country move forward are
you a Republican or a Democrat
Republican and you're gonna vote for
Clinton no but your will you vote for
Bush between Bush and vote
for the party I see okay thank you let's
move up here
Tom mellitus CIA a CPA and accountant
Tom how did you think it went tonight
well I think it was the format was good
I think all three really did a good job
and what about Bush you you said you
were going to support him are you still
I still support Bush I think he's much
more favorable without the negatives out
throwing mud let's talk about the other
person in this debate a little bit more
Ross Perot Brian page is a systems
analyst here at OSU Brian you were not
necessarily going to be for Ross Perot
when you came in here tonight what about
now I think he's the only one that
really offers a change bush and clinton
or standard politics as usual and
Pireaus the only one that'll say what's
wrong and actually proposed to fix it
but do you think he offered specific
policy initiatives that would work why
are you voting for him I think that our
country is locked in political gridlock
and he's the only one that's going to
break it and move the country ahead for
the better and you ma'am would you stand
up please who are you and what do you do
I'm Kathy Coffey I work for a school
system Kathy who do you think won
tonight why Stefan Utley think Perot one
it surprised me does that mean he gets
your vote not necessarily but I was
surprised that Bush came in so low if
you're surprised Bush came in so low are
you disappointed enough not to vote for
him I don't know if I'm brave enough to
vote for Perot hmm and Bill Clinton is
out of the question for you no I'm
afraid it's probably between the two of
them now okay let's let's move right
around here one more quick one how about
you sir your name and what do you do
Steve here some CPA tax consultant what
did you decide tonight I decided I've
been a Republican for a long time I'm
going for Clinton primarily because of
the health insurance issue all right
thank you very much
Tom one thing they all said is they
might vote for Bush or they might vote
for Clinton but they would certainly
want to have dinner with Ross Perot if
he buys well I think you could count on
the man buying he said he was only gonna
serve for one term if he gets there and
he'll give up his salary which is a
little more than $200,000 that's wham
money for Ross Perot walking around
money at this stage of his personal life
he's worth about three billion dollars
altogether let me ask you quickly Bob
ker what did they think of the decision
not to discuss personal character in
this debate tonight most of the people
here and I think they'll hear me so
they'll agree we're very glad that it
didn't get down into the gutter they
were very apprehensive about that they
haven't liked that at all they don't
they think there are valid questions
about trust and character but they don't
want to see a lot of time spent on it
they've already heard it all right thank
you Bob we'll be back with more from
University of Richmond right after this
[Music]
we have left the next debate is Monday
night in East Lansing Michigan do you
think the tone here tonight will affect
that one
I think reporters will be asking
questions they're in character Andy Rock
gate and things like that will come up
I think it'll have a tougher edge this
was so lovely though it may overshadow
that one all right we'll see you Monday
night from East Lansing analysis of all
of this tomorrow morning and today and
then again tomorrow night on NBC Nightly
News I'm Tom Brokaw in Richmond
[Music]
Daniel